[Music]
in 2002 a group of treatment activists
met to discuss the early development of
the airplane the Wright brothers in the
beginning of the last century had for
the first time managed to make one of
those devices fly they also had taken
out numerous patents on essential parts
of the airplane they were not the only
ones that was common practice in the
industry and those who helped patents on
airplanes were defending them fiercely
and suing competitors left and right
this actually wasn't so great for the
development of the aviation industry and
this was at the time that in particular
the US government was interested in
ramping up the production of military
airplanes so there was a bit of a
conflict there the US government decided
to take action and force those patent
holders to make their patents available
to share with others to enable the
production of of airplanes so what is
this got to do with this in 2002 Nelson
automa a Kenyan social scientist
discovered he had HIV and needed access
to treatment he was told that a cure did
not exist AIDS he heard was lethal and
treatment was not offered this was at a
time that treatment actually existed in
rich countries aids had become a chronic
disease people in our countries here in
Europe in North America were living with
HIV healthy lives
not so for Nelson he wasn't rich enough
and not so for his three-year-old son he
discovered a year later also had HIV
Nelson decided to become a treatment
activist and join up with other groups
in 2002 they were facing a different
battle
prices for RVs the drugs needed to treat
HIV costs about 12,000 per patient per
year the patents on those drugs were
held by a number of Western
pharmaceutical companies that were not
necessarily willing to make those
patents available when you have a patent
you can exclude anyone else from making
from from producing or making low-cost
versions for example available of those
of those medications clearly this led to
patent Wars breaking out all over the
globe luckily those patents did not
exist everywhere there were countries
that did not recognize pharmaceutical
product patterns such as India and
Indian pharmaceutical companies started
to produce so-called generic versions
low-cost copies of antiretroviral
medicines and make them develop
available in the developing world and
within a year the price had come down
from $10,000 per patient per year to 350
dollars per patient per year and today
that saying triple pill cocktail is
available for $60 per patient per year
and of course that started to have an
enormous effect on the number of people
who could afford access to those
medicines treatment programs became
possible funding became available and
the number of people on antiretroviral
drugs started to increase very rapidly
today 8 million people have access to
antiretroviral drugs 34 million are
infected with HIV never has this number
been so high but actually this is good
news because what it means is people
stop dying people who have access to
these drugs stop dying and there's
something else they also stop passing on
the virus this is fairly recent science
that has shown that what it means is we
have the tools to break the
of this epidemic so what's the problem
well things have changed first of all
the rules have changed today
all countries are obliged to provide
patents for pharmaceuticals that lasts
at least 20 years this is as a result of
the intellectual property rules of the
World Trade Organization
so what India did is no longer possible
second the practice of patent holding
companies have changed here you see the
patent practices before the World Trade
organization's rules before 95 for
antiretroviral drugs this is what you
see today and this is in developing
countries so what that means is unless
we do something deliberate and unless we
do something now we will very soon be
faced with another drug price crisis
because new drugs are developed new
drugs go to market but these medicines
are patented in a much wider range of
countries so unless we act unless we do
something today we will soon be faced
with some have termed the treatment time
bomb it isn't only the number of drugs
that are patented there's something else
that can really scare generic
manufacturers away this shows you a
patent landscape this is the landscape
of what medicine so you can imagine that
if you are a generic company about to
decide whether to invest in the
development of this product unless you
know that the licenses to these patterns
are actually going to be available you
will probably choose to do something
else again deliberate action is needed
so surely if a patent pool could be
established to ramp up the production of
military airplanes we should be able to
do
something similar to tackle the hiv/aids
epidemic and we did in 2010 unit 8
established the medicines patent pool
for HIV and this is how it works
patent holders inventors that develop
new medicines patent those inventions
but make those patents available to the
medicines patent pool the medicines
patent pool then license those out who
ever need access to those patents that
can be generic manufacturers it can also
be known for-profit drug development
agencies for example those manufacturers
can then sell those medicines had much
lower costs to people who need access to
them to treatment programs that need
access to them they pay royalties over
the sales to the patent holders so they
are remunerated
for sharing their intellectual property
there is one key difference with the
airplane patent pool the medicines
patent pool is a voluntary mechanism the
airplane patent holders were not left a
choice whether they license their
patents or not they were forced to do so
and that is something that the medicines
patent pool cannot do it relies on the
willingness of pharmaceutical companies
to license their patents and make them
available for others for others to use
today Nelson Adama is healthy he has
access to antiretroviral drugs his son
will soon be 14 years old Nelson is a
member of the expert advisory group of
the medicines patent pool and he told me
not so long ago alone we rely in Kenya
and in many other countries on the
medicines patent pool to make sure that
new medicines
also become available to us that new
medicines without delay become available
to us and this is no longer fantasy
already I'll give you an example in
August of this year the United States
drug agency approved the new four and
one-eighth medication the company gilja
that holds the patents as licensed
license the intellectual property to the
medicines patent pool the pool is
already working today
two months later with generic
manufacturers to make sure that this
product can go to market at low cost
where and when it is needed this is
unprecedented this has never been done
before the rule is about a ten year
delay for a new product to go to market
in developing countries if at all this
has never been seen before Nelson's
expectations are very high and quite
rightly so he and his son will need
access to the next generation anti
retrovirals and the next throughout
their lifetime so that he and many
others in Kenya and other countries can
continue to live healthy active lives
now we count on the willingness of drug
companies to make that happen we count
on those companies that understand that
it is in the interest not only in
interest of the global good but also in
their own interest to move from conflict
to collaboration and through the
medicines patent pool they can make that
happen they can also choose not to do
that but they don't go down that road
may end up in a similar situation the
Wright brothers ended up with early last
century facing forcible measures by
government so they better jump now thank
you
[Applause]